and now we're live
and as it's nine o'clock um i'd say we
start very slowly i think there are
still many people that
have registered but haven't joined yet
but
i think we can switch to english and uh
switch from the coffee chat
to a general intro into the
workshop that we're giving here today um
we are having a full day workshop
on research data management with
datalite
and it's the two of us that have
organized it imadina
and that that that
that is i'm not sure whether i'm poking
you at the correct side but this is
where you are
hi everyone i'm leonard i'm a phd
student at the mpi berlin
and yeah thanks everyone for coming and
dedicating your time to a full day
workshop
on research data management and data
that
yeah absolutely i hope that the majority
of you sits comfortably
in a very neatly made home office
somewhere or in whichever setting you
prefer
it's not the home office that you're in
and i think i will just start with some
logistics
um to
uh yeah get a couple logistical things
uh straight fast so uh we have tried to
organize this
workshop with a schedule and we have
this companion website
um you can find it
at this url and it's also in the shared
notes
and this is the schedule that we
envisioned for the workshop but it's a
virtual setting
and it's a software workshop and we have
not uh practiced the
workshop step by step so we'll see uh
how how well we we can make the schedule
um
but uh we'll try we'll try to um
let's uh introduce ourselves a bit
i'm medina and i think the majority of
people
may probably know leonard but not me i'm
from the fortune center music
i work there as a doctoral researcher
in the psychoinformatics lab at the
institute for neuroscience and medicine
i'm part of the data led development
team and
my particular role there is is
with some some programming uh mainly
mainly teaching and and outreach and and
documentation
and so forth and i think that's that's
it from my side um yes and i
will introduce myself again i mean i
just quickly did it
but just for completeness um so i'm
leonard i'm
at the mpi berlin in the maximum
research group neuro code led by
nicoshock
and um if i don't spend all my time
on research data management and like
thinking about how to improve science i
actually investigate how
we can study um fast memory reactivation
in humans
with fmri so-called so-called replay
phenomena
and that's actually the main focus of my
dissertation
and maybe just to clarify my
role um i mean adina as you just told
you
she really knows database and knows what
she's talking about
i would describe myself more as an
enthusiastic user of datalit actually
very recent use i think i've only
started to use data that
a couple of months ago and i hope i can
kind of
transport this and enthusiasm to you
and also say a couple of useful things
during the workshop um yeah yeah
cool then i want to take a minute
to introduce the virtual venue for those
who have never been to a big blue bot
video conference i hope you all have
a good audio experience and you have
been able to join
we don't know whether anyone who hasn't
been able to join his problems but
yeah sorry for for those people um
big blue button is quite nice uh to just
give you a quick overview of the
features that it has is
we are currently screen sharing and the
screen share is also
what is being recorded um
whoops and you have a
public chat in which you can say hi to
everyone and chat with everyone and ask
questions
there is unfortunately no emoji list
that you can
use and select emojis with but
as a personal tip you can copy paste
them
from any other website and then copy
paste them into the chat and that works
fine if you're if you're into using
emojis
you can also pick any participant of
your choice
uh and um message them in a private chat
if you want to gossip
and like unlike zoom us workshop
organizers will not be able to see those
private chats
so so we promise you that nothing you
will gossip about us there will ever
reach our eyes so
please feel free to do so um there is
also
a shared note section you can find it on
the left hand side
and i have already pasted a couple of
useful things there
for one there is a shortcut to all of
the
links that i would regard as helpful
during the workshop you can for one
find the link to our website
then links to pdfs of our slides
and code or hands-on sessions i've
copy-pasted a small glossary there that
please you can feel free to extend if
you have things to share
if you know things i'm very certain that
they are very knowledgeable
knowledgeable people in this audience
and um
we hope that we can have lively
discussions uh
and if you have something that that fits
there that you regard as helpful
you have a nice resource for for for
other people then
please just put it there and we can
export those shared notes and also make
them available later
i would only ask you to adhere to the
code of conduct and not
um i don't know insult people sexually
harass people
like be a decent human being also in the
in the shared notes
and in the chat and in private chats and
please don't
uh delete stuff from the shared notes
that could be valuable for other people
uh because if you delete it then it's
gone for everyone and
it's not easy to bring back so please
don't don't try to do that
then you can so this is a full day
workshop but
we're aware that the people have lives
outside
of their work and uh you can drop out
and rejoin
uh into this workshop as you please but
because we
have little way of seeing um whether
you're
actually here or not unlike in an actual
in-person setting
we would ask you to make use of the
status setting if you click on your
little
icon um on the left hand side
then you can set a status and if you're
not
joining in if you're let's say in a
different
in a different and different important
meeting if you have to to
collect your your kids from kindergarten
or whatever
then just tell us that you're away then
uh
we don't try to put you into breakout
rooms and so forth and just
that's that would be nice if you could
do this
um then uh we wanted to um
tell you why we're here do you want to
do this leonard yes
yes i could do that but i also just
wanted to add or emphasize um what
you've been saying before so
um you have various um ways to interact
with us and i mean
we all know that interaction via these
online settings can be tricky
so but we would really like to ask you
um to also make this as interactive as
possible which means
if you have any questions you are free
to kind of interrupt us or just speak up
or you can
like adina said you can use the public
chat or if you don't want your question
or comment in the public chat you can
also
write us in the private chat and then we
read it for you
um there are all these options and i
think we really appreciate
that um you just do that and
don't feel shy to um interact and
um comment on things i think it's also
we can also say that
um like on some things we're
maybe not entirely um sure in detail or
we
don't know everything about a certain
topic so if you actually have some
insights that you want to contribute
just feel free to
add them and just join the discussion
basically
um i think that's um that might be nice
for all of us basically
so we don't need to talk all the time
throughout the whole day and as
people have been telling me that my
microphone doesn't sound too good i've
tried to adjust it now
so if my audio ever sounds weird uh if
if if it makes weird noises just tell me
i have no way of knowing unfortunately
okay um we wanted to stress why we're
here just
um to to be transparent about this and
to
raise awareness and attention um we're
here because of
an organization that is called repronam
which is short for reproducible neural
imaging
and that is an initiative to improve the
reproducibility
and efficiency in neuroimaging and
the goal i've already paraphrased it in
this first
statement is to improve the
reproducibility of neural imaging
science
and extend the value of our national
investment in neuroimaging research
around making the process easier and
more efficient for investigators
and while all of this stresses neural
imaging lenders and i have decided that
we
want to do this in an under imaging
specific way
but just as a general introduction to a
couple of helpful tools that
can improve reproducibility
in whatever signs of field that you're
actually in
and ripening does these efforts by
developing free teaching materials so
you can go to their website and find
really nice
nice materials that you can work through
yourself or that you can send to others
um reprodum supports open software tool
development
and it offers also training activities
and leonard and i were lucky to receive
a fellowship from the reproductive
organization and the international
neuroinformatics coordinating facility
and
that's where fellows of this
organization and fellows like us
we teach our peers in independent
courses
in workshops or in hackathons about the
tools or methods
in our field that we think are helpful
to increase the disability of research
in general
and yeah today um we have a workshop
um uh made that centers around datalab
and um we try to
um use the full day that we're having
here to do a little bit more than a
standard introduction so
a little bit more than just the standard
easy
start to end everything works out fine
uh use cases um but we try to
do that and also give some in-depth
explanations and and hands-on
experience that you can participate in
and also discussions
so we try to enable confident users that
actually
have an idea of what the tool can do can
do an informed decision
whether they want to use it and have
concrete
examples of what to do with it and how
to troubleshoot and how to use it for
various settings
and we have tried to incorporate our own
workflows as researchers
and how we use it day-to-day to make our
science better and
and much more importantly also uh easier
for ourselves
and maybe maybe just to add to that um
like adina said it's it many of the
workflows that we present are
meant as kind of illustrations and just
to
put out some ideas like next to the
basics we teach for example about
research data management and data lab
and um this is again like idina said
it's not
complete and like covers all the use
cases that you possibly have
so again if you can think of any useful
um useful
project that these methods could be
applied to then feel free to share them
and we just kind of throw out ideas um
so that you kind of inspired maybe
how these tools can be used
[Music]
and just to put in in slide form in
writing
what leonard has already said we've
tried to lay out some
some um advice for interactions
throughout this
virtual workshop for one if you have a
question
and uh please very much feel encouraged
to to
ask questions there are no stupid
questions the things that we're talking
about here
are hard especially if you have
say never used your terminal if you have
never used a software container
we don't know where you're standing uh
is in neuroscience or in
a related field we don't know how much
computer skills you bring
with you to this workshop and if you are
just starting out or if there's a
concept that that you don't know about
then it's much easier for you to to to
get started with it if you ask us a
question and we have the chance
to answer it maybe you also have a very
very detailed question or very complex
question and then we
might may not be able to answer it
please feel encouraged
to uh to ask those questions so that you
have a chance to get an answer
and we have a chance to get to know
whether we lose any audience
to to just give us the chance to make
this as useful
as possible for you and thankfully a
couple of people from
from my lab has also have also joined
this video conference
there is benjamin already here and and
michael
who is my boss and i think
laura will also join later and all of
those people work on dataled
and they have been so kind as to offer
chat support
so um while leonard and i uh
will try to talk and entertain you
we may not be uh able to to monitor the
chat
super well and then there are other
people that can jump in
and assist us with answering your
questions so
please make use of that feature and
thank you very much everyone for
for agreeing to to help it's uh really
appreciated by everyone
one thing that i would ask you though is
to first ask the question in the chat
and not interrupt the speaker if they
are talking
if you can sometimes it may make sense
but it's more polite if you do it in the
chat first
and then we'll try to get to it and if
you have a
um anything that you want to discuss
or if we are initiating a discussion
then please
as leonard said feel encouraged to join
we try to make this
an enjoyable thing and not something
that you
have to endure out of politeness
and we're also happy to discuss specific
use cases in the end so if you're
intrigued about data later if you've
already used it
and have some some concrete questions or
implementation ideas
uh then we're happy to to just
hear about them and discuss them and
answer your questions but they may not
fit into let's say the basics or the
specific use cases
that we have um planned for this
workshop so
i would ask you to take them and paste
them in the shared notes there's a
section for this
and at a point in the workshop where we
have time to discuss them
then we can pick them up however we see
flexible
and just as another heads up because
more people joined we are recording
those lectures
and we will make them available online
if you don't want your picture to be
taken and published to youtube
then uh it's better not to better not
start your camera
i'm not sure whether that one is
actually recorded on or just this green
chair
but better be safe than sorry if you
don't want to be recorded then
don't open up your video if the
recording button is on
okay if the workshop is over and you
still have questions then
we are not out of this world and we
don't want to leave you hanging with
remaining questions or problems or
whatever it is that you may face so if
you have
a question after the workshop and you
start using dataled
then you can reach out for example to
the data latin directly
and we have a matrix chat channel where
you can
chat to us and ask questions and if you
have
uh if you like github better
then you can go to the github repository
where we host our source code
and create an issue and talk to us you
can also
reach out to a user community of datalet
that's especially
big in the neurosciences and if you go
to neurostars.org which is the stack
overflow for neuroscientists
and then create a post with a data tag
then people that are using datalet can
come and help you with the questions
that you have
and of course if you want to learn more
after the workshop
if there are remaining questions that we
didn't have time for or
anything else comes up after the
workshop then
there is a data led youtube channel
where we will also publish these videos
and uh there's something that is called
the data led handbook which
is a user centered
documentation resource and i want to
bring special attention to that because
everything that we're talking about
is documented in there and you can read
up on it in your own pace
and there's much more to to to know
about data led
then we can talk about and all of that
is put in the data that handbook
from overall installation configuration
things
uh to a complete tutorial work through
about all of the basic functionalities
and um
step-by-step solutions to common data
management problems in
in the use cases maybe maybe to quickly
add to that
or just to emphasize um from a
perspective of a kind of recent
user who learned about data that i can
i cannot recommend the data that
handbook enough so it's
really amazing how extensive this
resource is
and i think if you print it to bf it's a
couple of hundred
pages or so um and it's actually really
fun
because it has a lot of examples and has
some kind of narrative that
walks you through different exercises
and so on so um
it's really a great resource to learn
about data that
and i really encourage you to check it
out
[Music]
okay we have set up a live polling
system
to try to get a little bit more
interactivity
into the workshop and we would ask you
to take your phone
uh i i i'm pretty sure everyone is on
their phones already
by the time at the time right now um
and scan the qr code and this should
take you to
a web page where you will be able to
um to to answer to polls that we can
remote control uh during the slide so if
you
have um scan this qr code or
alternatively
went to the short url that you can see
here at the start of the slide
then you can answer now the first
question
um where we will just try to see whether
the live pooling works
you should now be able to um to select
the type of sheep that you feel like
today
and we'll see whether that worked out
[Music]
did everyone manage to scan the code or
type the link
i think so answers are coming in
[Music]
lots of sleepy sheeps i made an internal
bed that
4 is going to be the most popular sheet
i lost that one let's see whether my
prediction for the next one
works that is on a scale of rubber duck
i should just plug in and influence the
result count by
by voting as well
but i'm very glad that there are already
three people
that that that look glooming and
and and majestic through their zoom call
experience
okay great thank you very much uh that
seems to work out nicely cool
and we would like to also uh use this
uh welcome and introduction section to
learn a little bit about
our audience um
i forgot about this question that's of
course a very important thing
to learn about our audience
and full disclosure i'm still wearing
them
okay but now we're actually getting to
do a kind of technical assessment
so first of all we would like to know
how many people are planning to to
interact
and how many people are just planning to
observe the workshop
and if there may be already people that
have questions from what they have
started
with
[Music]
what
nice distribution i'm happy that people
plan to to interact i'm happy that
people are here
to not interact and just watch that's
equally fine
thank you and then because um
it's going to be a little bit about
version control today uh spoiler
um i would like to know uh how many
people have
or how much do you know about the
version control toolkit
whether you have never heard of it
you've heard about it but haven't used
it
you've used it but uh not so confident
with it whether you use it
confidently or whether you use it so
proficiently that your middle name is
good in it
[Music]
oh god we gave stefan an idea
i'm volunteering to be a godmother of
that child stefan
okay that's a that's a nice distribution
i'm very happy that so many people have
heard of kid
and uh hope that um later
throughout this workshop you'll see uh
an easy way to use version control if
you want to
we should actually do a pre-post
assessment
it's true yeah yeah we can do this
um yes so one thing that would be very
relevant because datalite is a command
line tool
um predominantly um
we would like to know how much you know
about your computer's terminal whether
you have never used it
actually whether you have used it
sometimes but not so frequently
or if you're if you're if you're it's a
proficient user that that use it
for for many or most tasks throughout
your research
and that looks like a nice
nice start already i'm happy that so
many people use use the terminal that
makes it very
very very easy much easier for us
okay and that's going to be interesting
for
a later hands-on session for those
people that plan to interact
with it um whether you have an mpi
keeper c file account um
[Music]
i'm also very curious about that because
i it was very
late that i discovered that the service
exists
so i'm really curious how many other
people have not heard about it or
actually have heard about it
but seems rather balanced actually
so those seven people that don't have
the keeper account that are affiliated
with the mpi that's that's one learning
if there's nothing that you will learn
about this workshop that's one already
maybe briefly so um comment that she's
not sure what it
is and that's no problem at all like i
said i
also up until quite recently i also
didn't know about it
and it's just a service of the max
planck society that we will use
in one of the later examples and it's no
big deal
if you don't know about it and it's not
an issue to follow the hands-on session
later
okay and then which operating system do
you use
i'm very intimidated by anyone who says
windows
so many people say windows
if you're using windows then i'm already
very sorry about the terminal experience
you're going to have
should you decide to to code along
because the terminal on windows
is not the nicest i can guarantee you
that it looks better for everyone who's
not on windows
i'm not trying to bash windows i'm just
apologizing for the visual experience
[Music]
i think yeah that's already uh
the next one so uh last slide i think
about the logistics um what we'll be
doing throughout the workshop once we've
finished with this session starting from
the next session on
we'll do a mix of live demonstrations of
data led with live coding
or remote control terminals and we'll
also show some workflows
um we have a mix of of of 10 new views
and slides
and we try to keep it entertaining you
can copy a lot a quote along with copy
paste
yeah if you want to and there are links
to that on the workshop website
um there are also hands-on sessions on
the workshop website and once those
become relevant then we will point you
to it
but if you want to code along and we've
already discussed this
discuss this a bit in in the in the
pre-workshop coffee chat
um you will have to have data led uh
installed if you want to also use
the container features then you will
have to have a data like container
extension
installed at the python package and for
the letter you also need
a container solution like singularity or
docker we apologize for that it's
really hard to to do virtual workshop
without having the possibility to
to to distribute the correctly set up
software environment to everyone
but we hope that that it works out um
okay and now i'm going to hand over to
you leonard i'm going to quickly stop
this
stop screen sharing so that you can do
so
yeah yeah so i was just adding the
link to the port to the public notes oh
thank you
all right can you see my screen not yet
but it's loading
how about now
i can't yet but stefan sees it
so i have i have this slide so
okay um
yeah due to my setup i can't monitor the
chat
or see you and see my slides at the same
time so
just feel free to interrupt me if
anything
if you can't see it okay so samia can go
now
we can see you we can see your screen
awesome
okay um so thanks for this introduction
of the workshop alina
and um now i would like to briefly
motivate um the whole experience and the
topic
research data management just to kind of
get you a bit excited but also point to
some of the
issues and questions um that we're
talking about when we talk about
research data management so um
actually i'm going to start with some
real-world examples for research data
management gone wrong
um so this is a very recent example
actually i'm just going to read it
um so this from taken from the guardian
and so a million it was found that a
million row limit on
microsoft excel spreadsheet software may
have led
to public health england misplacing
nearly 16 000 corporate
test results it is understood the data
error which led to
almost 16 thousand positive tests being
left off the official daily figures
means that
fifty thousand potentially infectious
people may have been missed by contact
tracers and not told to
self-isolate in this case the guardian
understands one lab has
sent its daily test reports to phe so
public health england
in the form of the csv file the simplest
possible database format
just a list of values separated by
commas that report was then loaded into
microsoft excel
and the new tests at the bottom were
added to the main database but where csv
files can be any size
microsoft excel files can only be 148
576 rows long or in older versions which
phd may still have been using
a mere 65 hundred thirty six
when the cc far longer then that is open
the bottom row gets cut off and no law
is no longer displayed
that means that once the lab had
performed more than a million tests it
was only a matter of time
before its repelled failed to be read by
phd
so um this is an example where kind of
it's not really it's the question if you
would call that research data
um specifically but um it's an issue um
with real life consequences where data
management was
let's say sub-optimal um
another example is a bit older um is
from economics
maybe some of you heard that so there
was a
very popular study in economics
that showed that average real economic
growth
slows when a country's step rises more
than 90
percent of the gross domestic product
and um
this the finding of the study has
actually been
used or brought forward by many
politicians around the world
to support for example
politics like in greece so kind of
finance politics
and actually so which of course had kind
of
very important real world um
implications
and um only later it was found actually
by a phd student
um that um the numbers were incorrect
and as it turned out that
um the access spreadsheet that was used
to come up with these numbers
omitted some um rows from some countries
like australia
austria belgium canada and denmark
and um and exactly how in many reports
was noted
that this um failure um or this
incident um could mainly be ascribed to
a pervasive failure of scientific and
other researchers to make all data and
computer
code publicly available at an early
stage
um because if this error would have been
discovered earlier
um then um yeah the
interpret the interpretation of the
findings um could have changed
um just to give a third example which is
uh i think quite funny but also quite
impressive i think so um that's again
very quite recent
so actually it was decided by the
hugo so the human gene nomenclature
committee
that they wouldn't rename genes
because excel would misread them as
states so as an example
there's apparently a gene called
mar mar
ch1 which actually then always translate
to a date
uh in this case the first of march
and um that's a bit funny actually
and um but i think what's interesting
the
the consequence from that um is actually
interesting because
it's not um the consequence is not to
drop
the problematic tool in this case
microsoft excel but rather
change the name of the genes so now for
example
this march gene was changed to
m-a-r-m-a-r-c-c-hf
one which then doesn't lead to this uh
translation into a
date by microsoft excel so actually in
this case we have
kind of scientific knowledge um changed
because um the
[Music]
the infrastructure with which the data
is analyzed does not
match basically um
right um so that's
another example how um yeah research
data management can go wrong and um
i mean you might notice that all of
these examples um talk about
excel and again it's not to specifically
bash excel although i think you should
consider maybe that access optimal for
many
types of data analyses but it's just to
illustrate
how problematic
data management can lead to real world
consequences and real problems
so maybe just to give an example that is
a bit closer to home as i would say
of course issues with research data
management
and um replication or reproducibility
generally
exists in kind of our fields i think
where most people in the audience
work in which i think for most people's
psychology
or neuroscience and i'm pretty sure
you've all heard about the replication
crisis
and um so the general finding
that a lot of um findings in biomedical
research
cannot be replicated or the results
cannot be
reproduced and um
exactly so i just take um one report
here by munafort
from nato human behavior and that kind
of accumulating evidence suggests that
there's um how they very um
diplomatically
expressed here there's substantial room
for improvement
with regard to research practices and
of course you might say now well
replication crisis
there are so many other issues related
to that
like the academic culture more generally
um and
questionable research practices like for
example p hacking
um but we i'm going to focus on
one of these issues which is research
data management
um so let me maybe briefly talk about
what are the underlying issues when we
think about the replication crisis or
these
other real world examples um when data
management
went wrong or was problematic um what
are actually the
some of the underlying issues and one
issue
is um and what's also the core
assumption also for the workshop is
that data change um so
it's not you can't really assume or
maybe you know that from your own
experience
that a file on your computer is always
the same file
you will do some transformation on it
some something in your
computer system might change that
affects the file
so you can't really assume that the same
file will always
remain the same file throughout time
and there's this nice illustration one
of uh
phd comics which also illustrates is
actually a good example for
version control where you um want to
track changes in
one specific file over time um but that
also illustrates right that
um for example here this data
dot dot file um also seems to have
many different versions and it uh
changes and
we need to be able to track those
changes so um
new data um is added or old data is
removed from a project
you detect errors in data you fix errors
and you actually introduce new errors
and
you have maybe separate versions of the
same
data or file that you create at some
point but actually want to merge
again at some point and we need to find
a process
where we have more control um over this
transformation of data throughout time
um and another aspect that is important
to mention here is
um methods documentation and provenance
just to
again pick an example in this case from
neuroscience
um there are several studies um that now
showed that
actually flexibility in the way you
analyze your data
leads to very sizable variations in the
results
so um which really emphasizes that
the way you analyze your data really
matters and it should be
transparent how you analyze data how
data
how certain data came into existence in
the first place
um because this really influences the
results and
maybe as a side note then people also
emphasize that
data should ideally be analyzed in in
different ways
to see how robust the results are and if
it's not if a certain finding is not
only
an artifact so to say of one specific
analysis pipeline
so like i said before you should provide
information how data came into existence
you should make explicit how
data is changed through code so
um ideally this code is documented and
also how the code
changed the data should be documented
and it shouldn't
or as um yeah you should avoid basically
to
do a lot of manual changes that you
can't trace back
to determine what happened to a certain
data file um
yeah that's what i just mentioned so
relate changes
in data to changes in code
[Music]
and of course i don't have it on a
separate slide here but this
also includes um the computational
environment so we know that
um um the com the computational
environment that you use to run a
certain analysis
also can influence the result and i
would just subsume this under this
category that it should also be
documented
um which computational environment you
use to
get to a specific result or a specific
data file
all right um so actually i wanted to use
another poll at this point um namely the
question kind of what's holding you back
i mean we have all this
evidence i would say and all these
examples what can go wrong with
data management but as i guess the
replication crisis
has shown is that maybe
not so much has changed and we also know
that um
achieving reproducibility for your own
research project can be hard
and there are other potential barriers
to work more reproducible and we listed
a couple of statements here
that you've maybe heard before or maybe
have said yourself
or thought before that
could point to potential barriers and um
i think it's also good to reflect at
this point um
what for example has maybe you has
influenced you
um not to work as reproducible as you
would have liked or
um would want to of course this list is
not complete so
if anyone um has an additional comment
about what what could be potential
barriers
um feel free to um yeah add this to the
chat for example or we can also discuss
about this
later but you can also you can also just
just add
the most infuriating response that
you've ever gotten
from people that you requested data from
uh people that you try to
try to talk about drupal disability and
so forth
because all of these things in mine and
leonard's opinion and we are
those those early career research
with enthusiasm about reproducible and
open science
and uh and this kind of missionary
energy and all of these statements
are really really infuriating and i
think we've heard of them
all already so if you've heard them also
and
and just want to share the worst one
just pick that up
that that answer
yeah and maybe just to point out a few
also as i see
um the answer so actually the top
scoring one is um number four right so
reproducibility sounds all right but my
code and data are spread over so many
hard drives and directories
there would just be too much work to
collect them all in one place and
i can like don't get me wrong i can
totally
resonate um with that feeling or
statement
um but also um
i would say that this points to a
problem right it's not
ideal that we tend to spread code and
data over
so many different places and this again
makes
makes it harder for us to work
reproducible and be able to
reproduce our results but i think what's
important i think to emphasize here
like we've all been there and we all
know these issues
exist and um that's just why i want to
bring it up at this point
um okay thank you for your answers
um so another aspect i think that is
important to mention
is that i put out all these real world
examples where
um research data management has gone
wrong and um
kind of i guess mistakes have been made
um but um and then i i kind of told you
well
um it sometimes can feel that um all
this talking about reproducibility and
replication
is very much driven by a lot of idealism
and kind of has some morale to it
and then i also experience that
sometimes people might be defensive
or discussions can become quite heated
um because um people maybe feel like oh
i
don't follow my kind of moral obligation
um
and um yeah this doesn't feel good so
but what i want to point out is and what
other many others have
also pointed out that there are actually
a lot of um
you could call them selfish reasons for
reproducibility
um so i think we have to acknowledge
that we live into a
live in a specific academic culture and
um a lot in science is about um like
um floyd macovet said here a lot of
sciences
about more publications more impact
factor more money
more career so and these kind of
um these aspects sometimes tend to stand
in the way of
um working more reproducibility more
reproducible
which um often can mean
um to work a bit more slowly um and
so actually i want to put out some ideas
um how
rep working more reproducible can
actually help you
um so first of all um i guess one
important
aspect is that you want to avoid
disaster which
sounds a bit strong maybe but you don't
want to publish a miracle right i guess
we all want to produce research that is
reliable
and that other people can build on and
um
we don't want to find out that um years
later that
we have been publishing a miracle so
something that just happened because of
some error or some
specifics of our analysis pipeline
and another aspect i just
alluded to before um i think
although i'm not aware of any kind of
empirical findings on that
um if you know some i'm happy to hear
about them in the chat
um i think and i promise you you will be
faster in the long
run um because if you work reproducible
chances are much higher that
you will find errors and can fix errors
much faster
um also when you start with new projects
where you can maybe reuse data from
or code from previous projects so also
this progress on new projects
will happen much faster and maybe a
couple of other things will happen
faster as well
also in general other researchers and
reviewers will have
more trust in your findings when you can
make very transparent how
your findings came into existence um
data sharing um if you um have a very
um transparent way of managing your data
and then can share this data accordingly
um can foster collaboration and um
maybe just to mention here again the
most important collaborator
um very often is your past self
so um when you work very transparently
only maybe half a year ago it would be
much easier for you
to get back into the specifics of a
project um
if everything is kind of neatly
documented
but it can also foster collaboration
with people
inside your institute are outside your
institution and
this can lead to more projects and more
publications
um that we care so much about um
and also another aspect to consider is
that you will acquire um mostly
technical skills
that will very likely in my opinion um
become increasingly important for your
career um may it be in academia where
um all these aspects of open science and
reproducibility
um from my perspective will become
increasingly important or an industry
um where they um use the same methods
for example when you think about a
company
um a data science company for example
um and maybe most importantly um and
also that's kind of the goal for our
workshop
um we just hope that um adopting some of
these
um practices will just be useful for
your everyday work
and make your life easier and actually
we have more about that
some illustrative examples in the next
couple slides
[Music]
um exactly because there are some common
problems in science that
you probably can relate to so example
one
i'm just going to read it so you write a
paper about an algorithm stay up late to
generate good looking figures but you
have to tweak parameters and display
options to make it work
and look good the next morning you have
no idea
which parameters produce which figures
in which of the figures fits to what you
report in the paper
so maybe we've all been in this
situation before we can we know this
um issue so that's um i guess a
classical
issue of for example um version control
or kind of lack of documentation um that
and
as you can see here in this illustration
you have um
you have this huge pile of files and
data
and you just don't know um which file
is responsible for be for producing your
findings in the end
maybe another example so your research
project
produces phenomenal results but your
laptop the only place
that stores the source code for the
results is stolen
and breaks and um adina found this
very funny but actually it's also quite
sad um
example um i think you can read it for
yourself
so it's basically a chemistry fifth year
phd student
who lost his or her computer and
um that contains all the research data
and uh the thesis and it's shortly very
shortly before
uh his or her defense and she really
needs to get
this computer back um so
this really highlights the problem if
all your important
work is only stored on in one place
and you don't have a backup um so again
we will
show you some workflows um that
also help with this problem basically
that you can um
distribute your data to different places
so that if
one place is lost or
the data vanishes then you still have it
in other places and you don't lose your
work
and i just want to add there are so many
people that would probably respond to
this with
no backup no sympathy uh saying
but honestly this thing evokes a
physical reaction
in me and i'm so really sorry for that
student
must be such a such a horrible horrible
horrible experience i had that actually
when i was still an undergraduate and
ever since then i know how horrible it
is i was
very happy to have made that bad
experience early
and now i have taken means to prevent it
but damn i'm really really sorry for
that person
all right um
and another example so graduate student
approaches their supervisor complaining
that the supervisor's research idea does
not work after weeks of discussion
it becomes apparent that oral
communication doesn't suffice
the student can sufficiently explain the
environment data algorithms etc
they construct it and if the supervisor
can't enter and use the
student project there's no way to find a
fix
um so here we have this again funny phd
comic
um with professor smith so how do i know
i didn't make a mistake in my code
professor smith did you tell the check
it yes
triple check it yes quadruple check it
yes did it confirm our hypothesis
yes then stop checking it um
maybe some of you have also experienced
this situation
and i also think it's it's a very common
problem that
um quite likely many of us
know or have experienced before and this
actually also
points to issues of documentation for
example or in general
communication about code and data
and later we will actually show some
workflows
how you can integrate communication
about your code and data and your
results
better with the actual code and data
rather that it's some communication that
happened in the coffee kitchen and is
then
effectively lost because you don't
remember it
um i'm not sure this is not the final
but second to final
uh one so pulsar wrote a script during
the phd that applied a specific method
to a data set
now with new data and a new project they
tried to reuse the script
but forgot how it worked um so you've
also probably been in this situation
maybe with someone else's code maybe
with
your code that you try to get it work
sometimes it only takes a couple of
weeks or so
and you're at a point where it was very
hard to figure out
what a specific piece of code does and
how it works
and it's very frustrating experience and
exhausting
to get it to work again
[Music]
and i think that's the final one so you
try to recreate results from another
labs published paper you base your
re-implementation on everything reported
in the paper
but the results you obtain look nowhere
like the original
um so that also points to issues of
reproducibility or replicability and
maybe you've attempted this in your own
research to reproduce someone else's
work
and yeah it's really sometimes kind of
data
archaeology that you really dig into
like all this
weird jungle of code and try to figure
out
what actually why some results don't
reproduce
um maybe adina you also have seen a few
experiments about that
absolutely absolutely but i'll talk
about it a little bit later in the
afternoon
exactly um so more about that later
um all right um maybe just to summarize
this so what's going on um all these
um examples were kind of headlined by
um common problems in science but
actually if we think about it wouldn't
we all agree
that it's actually pretty much all
problems in science
in fact all these problems that we
mentioned here
were already paraphrased in 1995.
so it's really the question at least for
us who are very enthusiastic
about representability um
when we wonder why don't we just make
our lives easier
and both for us for our feud for your
for our future selves for science as a
whole
and we think that
many we know the problems and many of
the tools
exist that can fix these problems and
also many of these tools are getting
easier and easier to use
um so sometimes we think
you only need to know that some
something exists and
you just need to get started
and that's i i know that it's often
easier said than done
but i also think that there's no really
no other recipe
and we hope that this whole workshop
kind of motivates you
to just learn about a new tool try
something new incorporate a new aspect
into your research
so i would also what i also would like
to emphasize is you should also not be
too hard on yourself so many of these
things
that we teach here or that you learn
elsewhere um
yeah they and they involve new learning
and learning about new stuff can be hard
and things go wrong
and you don't understand things um so
i would recommend just from my own
experience to yeah like i said
not be too hard on yourself just
to pick something that maybe um
hopefully helps you to solve a problem
that you currently have
um or if you have some free time and
energy um
watch some youtube video or some
demonstration
go to a workshop like this one and just
try to kind of gradually
weave in more of these tools in your
workflow but you don't need to
i think you don't need to do them all at
once and
produce the perfectly reproducible
reproducible paper from scratch
because but it's a problem it's a
process
and um with more learning you kind of
gradually
um improve your own way of working um
but yeah sometimes it's just good to
just jump in and get started and that's
what we
gonna do now after a long um talk about
the motivation
anything to add i do know um no i don't
think so
um if it's okay with you then i would
probably take over
and um start talking a little bit about
datanet
um yeah sure and uh then
so i'm going to to jump over your
concepts and
uh you we can get back to them at the
end
of this session because it's only 30
minutes
left and then maybe
okay i think
i want this one
oh one second
no has occurred in screenshot maybe you
have to continue
my computer doesn't want that in screen
share at the moment
no no okay so what i want to
briefly mention now is what data that
actually is
i'm not going to go into the how to
and kodo long examples just yet but
given
that we haven't talked at all about
what it is that data that is only about
the problems that we're facing
i want to use this session to give you a
rough overview
of the features that data that has and
basically a heads up on what is to come
during this workshop because
datalit is a tool that can help with
small or large scale data management and
probably with many of the problems
that you're facing and certainly with
the problems that we have highlighted
or that leonard has just highlighted uh
from from from real world examples
and it's really open source the command
line tool and
it has a python api um and to start with
the with the technical
um stuff with the with the with the
details first so
um it's available for all major
operating systems linux mac os windows
it's mit licensed we're doing open
source development and you will probably
use it
in a command line tool although you can
also use it in your script and i will
show you later how this is done
and datalit is a tool that builds on top
of two version control tools git and get
annex
and leonard has prepared for those
people that are not super confident with
get
a short concept overview of what version
control actually is
and git and i'm just jumping ahead of
him
uh very meanly i'm very sorry about that
um but uh for those that don't know get
there will be an short explanation on
that by
leonard um datalet allows
with the tools that it builds up on
version controlling arbitrarily large
content
and that enables you to not only
version control let's say your code or
your manuscript which
are things that you would usually
version control because they are small
and text-based files
but you can also version control data
and
even software alongside to it datalit
has also transport mechanisms for
sharing
and obtaining data and software and code
and whatever you decide to share so you
can
not only version control everything that
you're doing in your research
but you can also share this with other
people you can
consume the work that other people have
done even if it's only their data
and you can collaborate on let's say
scientific data analysis in the same way
that scientific or open source software
development works and in the session
at the end of our workshop in the
afternoon leonard and i will play
through a complete software development
like collaborative workflow
with infrastructure of the mpi and
datalite
has tools and concepts to
create computationally reproducible data
analysis
and this allows you to not only link
data code
software and your results together but
you can also track and share the
provenance
of those digital objects that you create
and that enables you
to be completely transparent and open
with your science if you want to and
make it easier for
you your future self and your
collaborators to
build upon and use your science uh
datalit is also a completely domain
agnostic too so
while uh the people that are developing
it are neural
images neuroscientists um there's no
specific data type that's
relevant and while it is most commonly
used in neural imaging
it's completely domain agnostic
at all i want to start with
acknowledgements when talking about
datalit
because leonard and i are here
presenting work that
is by no means done by us datalite is a
very large project
and it's been going on for many years
already it's part
of a large german and u.s american
collaboration and we're widely funded
and we collaborate internationally the
software
project came into existence with michael
and jarek
and has since attracted a number of
other car
developers namely
for the most part like highland benjamin
and benjamin is also here
um and a lot of additional contributors
it's open source software
and uh joey has i want to name him
explicitly because he is the creator and
maintainer of one of the underlying
software tools get annexed
and then there's the documentation
project of which i'm the lead which is
the datalet handbook
which is also growing steadily with a
lot of contributors that i want to
highlight
and thank you now the core concepts and
features of datalit
are as follows everything that you do
with dataled
happens in so-called data let data sets
that's the core
structure the core data structure of
datanet
and you can either create new empty
data sets and put in your stuff or you
can even transform from
existing directories into data sets and
a data set for those people that know
version control tools
is nothing but a joined git git nx
repository
this means for those people that are not
familiar with those tools
that it's a content agnostic structure
where
no custom data structures central
services
are involved and that essentially
for the most part looks and feels like a
regular directory on your computer so
you can see two screenshots here
of the same data set uh depending on how
you work on your computer
those are familiar views of directories
you can see on the left hand side
the fire viewer screenshot of the data
set it has
directories and it has files and that
looks all completely normal
and on the right hand side there's the
same data set in a terminal view where i
list the directories and files in that
directory with the ls or list command
inside of those data sets version
control is
very very easy because whatever you
place
into a data set can be version
controlled and whenever you want to
um save a modification to files that are
tracked in a datalet dataset
it is only a single command that you
need to use in order to perform version
control on
apple tranl sized data
but because we are building
transparently up
on those underlying version control
tools you can stay completely flexible
if you're new to data management or
version control
then you can use a non-complex data.core
api
to have very easy means to get into
version control
which is a complex concept in itself
really fast and easy so that's a good
idea for data management novices or if
you're a pi if you have a bachelor's or
master's student
that may not have the time to learn git
then
data led has a core api that makes
version control
much easier than say git but if you're
a really proficient git or get annex
user then you're completely free
to also use uh the commands that you
like to use
from git organics in a data set and
that's completely fine and you can also
mix
or use only get organic commands for
special cases
and we'll showcase that both both things
for showcase in the
demonstration of the basics the dataset
because it has those version control
features
has a history and that is a complete
digital notebook of everything that has
been done in a dataset
you can see that it associates a date an
author
and a change to everything that
has been saved and that is an incredibly
useful tool
for one it allows you to interact with
it
and version control and leonard will
talk about this shortly allows you for
example to reset your data set state
or some files in it to a previous date
that you
had once in your development history you
can revert changes that you're not
um that you're not happy with or you can
even bring back reverted changes you can
travel
back and forth in time you can at any
point
find out what was done when how why and
by whom
and that's an incredible helpful tool
because it gives you the possibility
to interact with others be that a
supervisor or a supervisee
or a collaborator to transparently share
whatever it is that you have done
without you needing to be
there to explain it to them in detail so
you have a digital lab notebook that
um that documents the whole process the
whole progress of let's say a research
project
and that's a very neat resource to have
also for you also for yourself by the
way so not only in supervision or
collaboration
uh scenarios but also if you want to
ever find out what it is that you have
done
in that paper you wrote five years ago
and
you can identify precise versions of
things which is a very very handy thing
as
leonard has already said in his
introduction if you are able
to identify let's say a data file or
complete
data data set in a specific version and
link
that to the analysis that you have run
and the results that you've obtained
you can be completely transparent about
the data that was the input
to your analysis beyond
those local features as i would call
them
data data sets have the ability or give
you the ability to consume other data
sets
or collaborate on data sets so you can
have
and be completely happy with the data
set on your workstation
but you have the possibility to also get
others data sets if they share them with
you
over a variety of channels and you then
once you have obtained such a data set
have easy means
to update whatever it is that happens in
the data set so instead of emailing
changes
back and forth you can use version
control mechanisms
that allow you to run a simple command
data let update to integrate
whatever your collaborator has done in a
data set
or let's say if data has been updated at
a public source
into your own data set on your
workstation
and if you want to share your data set
with others then
you can create a sibling data set so
a remote copy of your data set that
others
can clone or use and you can use the
same updating mechanisms to keep others
up to date about the work that you're
doing
and then if you do this interactively
with two or more persons you can do a
full interactive collaborative workflow
out of that
datalite also does machine readable and
re-executable provenance
one thing that it can do with something
that i will show you in the basics with
the so-called data.1 command is
it has means to link input code
containerized software environments
and output into a machine readable and
re-executable
record in the revision history of your
data set
and it allows you further to explore
such
a such a record by computationally
rerunning it automatically without you
having to remember what exactly
has been done which is a very
very powerful thing to to be doing it is
also
able to record remote sources of where
fires came from
or how they were obtained
and something that is maybe not
immediately clear
on why it is useful but it will become
clear once we
look at more complex demonstrations of
things
is that dataled adds seamless nesting
and data set linkage
this is something if you're a git user
that goes um
that that takes concepts that git can
also do but makes them much easier
and what you can see here is a hierarchy
of linked data sets for each of these
small
[Music]
stacks of things that's a data set and
you can see here
how there is a hierarchy that
transparently
exposes the evolution from a raw data
data set
to a published result in a paper where
each
step each modular unit of the process
here is
a standalone data set that is linked in
a precise version
to its connecting data sets and this
allows me
as a researcher to publish a paper that
is based on an
analysis that is in turn based on some
pre-processed data that is in turn
based on some raw data to publish this
whole
evolutionary process and giving others
the ability
to trace back every every single step
that i have done
to reuse let's say the analysis methods
i have used the pre-processed data i
have used
and if i decide that i'm also willing to
share the raw data
even the raw data what this also allows
me
is to operate recursively across a
hierarchy of data sets
and i will later show you in more detail
how this becomes really useful
the next thing that datalet allows you
to do
is to integrate what you are doing with
datalit whatever that may be
with various third-party integrations so
all of us
have probably some storage provider that
they go to be that c file dropbox
google drive or whatever they have maybe
a favorite repository hosting site that
they use
for example github or gitlab or they
have use cases to use such
things for example in order to share
data and
in all likelihood dataled has already
some functionality to interface with all
of those third-party integrations for
example for data storage
and exposure so that others can quickly
obtain the data that you publish
and even if there if you can find a
service which is not linked to datalit
it is probably possible to
implement that and you can just let us
know and then we can see
whether it's it's doable or you can also
just work together with us
and help to get your favorite service
connected
and a couple of examples to just show
you some real real-world demonstrations
of
what datalit is frequently used for but
just as
a short glimpse into it one
very popular way of using dataled is
just publish or consume data sets
via a very public and accessible
resource such as github gitlab
the open science framework or similar
services so here's a gif
that demonstrates the view of a github
repository
that's openly accessible but this
repository doesn't only share code but
it's actually a repository which has
gigabytes
of neural imaging data and with a single
command datalit clone
i i don't even need to be
registered on github have the ability to
obtain
this data set and in turn have access to
all of these gigabytes of neural imaging
data
on my computer right away an incredibly
powerful
and public way to make your
research or your data accessible or
publish it
another example of where dataled is used
is is as a behind the scenes
infrastructure component for data
transport and versioning so if you're in
neural imaging
then you maybe know open neuro a data
archive
brain life i o cloud computing platform
a consortium the canadian open
neuroscience
platform or c brain each of these large
um institutions um let's call them users
data led
behind the scenes as an infrastructure
component
as a backbone so if you go to open neuro
which just collects
hundreds of data sets and then you can
pick basically any data set
and while you have a web interface where
you can download those data as
as one giant blob each data set
also has the opportunity to data that
clone these data sets there's also a
public git repository giving you access
to it
and if you then use brain life then you
can take
any data set from there and compute it
in an open
source cloud infrastructure platform and
you get the provenance and the results
of your computations that you run there
in the form of a
data set back for example another
example
is that you can create and share open
and reproducible signs
where you can not only share data but
also software code and provenance that's
relevant
so here's an example of a reproducible
paper that
we have written earlier this year you
can see it's a github repository again
very publicly accessible and it points
to to this
paper that we have published and it says
it's sharing data code
and the manuscript for it and if i clone
this data set with the very same
data like learn command as in the first
example
then i don't only have access to
a automatically dynamically generated
manuscript that i can build on my local
computer
but i also have access to the data to
the code and to the provenance the
complete research process
that went into the creation of
this this research object and
lastly that's an example of how we at
the euleg research center and the
institute for neuroscience and medicine
use it
datalet can be used as a component in
central data management for institutions
and as an archival system
so any researcher that wants to have
access to
the non-public data sets that we
announced to use for example the uk
biobank for example
the en ki data set all neural imaging
data sets
then um they can go to gitlab or gitlab
instance
where we have created what is called a
super dataset
a collection of data sets that they can
clone from that git
lab instance in order to have access to
all of the data
that uh we have prepared for use in our
institute
and that extends beyond the raw data
because we've also extended the system
to an archival system
where every study that has been done in
our institute is archived with metadata
and can be queried
um using data so for example to find out
which studies have which have used which
which data
set and yes maybe to briefly
chime in here um for the mpi folks
um i think that nicely demonstrates what
is possible in terms of an
institute's data structure and
maybe some of you know are actually
involved in the discussions
of data management at the mpiv
and i mean as you could see in these
gifs
that uh adina showed um they also
leveraged
services like data lab like data yes of
course data but i mean
gitlab um and we also have an uh
mpi internal um gitlab
instance so um this would be a way to
use
existing services in combination with
dataled
to really kind of facilitate um data
management
within and outside of the institute
okay yeah and now i can hand back over
to you and you can
um walk through the important concepts
that
may be um very helpful for people that
have limited experience so far
let's say with it um all right i need to
stop
i think now you can screen share not
yet i'm going to make you presenter
again
but i think you have moderator
privileges so you can just click on me
and say take presenter and then rip it
from my hands okay
can you see the slides now yes
awesome okay i will just very briefly
get into some of
oh no i think we lost leonard that's too
bad
um yeah i think i will just take over
um one second and maybe he is able to
join
in a second it's going to be fun i don't
know
um the slides that he made here
but i will try to so uh leonard was so
kind to prepare
a couple of uh explanative um
slime yeah exactly powerpoint karaoke a
couple of slides
that now where's my screen sharing
that explain some of
the important underlying constructs or
concepts that
this workshop uses or takes as
some sort of a prerequisite are given
and one of them
first okay first we're going to define
uh reproducibility and replicability and
we take
a definition set that is uh
also in the touring way and uh is
for example in freeze and patterson 2017
it's very popular
um so reproducibility is when you use
the same data and the same methods to
and are able to obtain the same results
whereas we
um define replication as having
the same methods but new data and
getting um
not identical but results that are that
are fairly close
and supporting we are talking about what
is called robustness
when we use new methods on the same data
and receive
similar results and generalizability
which is
what many people call the overarching
goal of science is when
we can um find the same
support this support for the same
hypothesis or theory that we've made
when we
use new methods on new data and have
similar similar conclusions and then
there's a very important
um quotation by claire bowden and karen
bach
that is already almost 30 years ago
reproducibility happens when the
author's provider is possible only when
the authors provide all the necessary
data and computer code
to run the analysis again recreating the
results and
we want to um in this workshop show you
how that
how that can be done and later in the
afternoon you will see how it's not only
reproducibility that can be
supported um with tools like datalit but
how that uh how the concepts and tools
that we talk about
also uh have benefits that uh work
towards all of the other
definitions that are displayed here now
for those people that are not familiar
with version control here's a quick
slide that demonstrates what version
control is
so those are two illustrations that
display the same concept
and that relate to those common data
science problems that we've talked about
with version control you are capable of
basically having a clean desk and
nice revision history to work through
and and use
so the way that i explain version
control is with wikipedia
wikipedia is nice because everyone has
already read the wikipedia page and some
of you may even have edited the
wikipedia page
if you have edited a wikipedia page then
the process is as follows
you have to create an account it doesn't
need to be a real name but it has to be
an account
that you associate a username with so
that
when you do a change the change that you
make to the wikipedia page is associated
with your user account
and once you make this change and
submitted to wikipedia
then you are asked to provide a short
description of why the change was
necessary or what it is that you're
adding
and once you click submit in many cases
the edit that you did is directly
integrated
into the wikipedia page now importantly
even though this wikipedia page changed
the url doesn't change
so when you're editing a wikipedia page
about the pope then the
next version the most recent version of
that page that includes your edits
is not a wikipedia page pope
version 2 but it has the same url so
that people always go to the same url
even though there is constant evolution
now the wikipedia page usually has a
trace history button at the upper corner
that you can
click on to investigate how did this
page evolve over time
and you can see all of the edits that
have happened with an associated
username who did those changes at what
point and if you were to edit
the um pope wikipedia entry
with the important statement that he was
an excellent strip poker player
then someone in the next 15 seconds
approximately will come
and flag this this change as being
probably
not factual and what is
possible with wikipedia is then to
identify this particular change that you
did
in the revision history of the page and
reverting it
and that creates another entry in the
revisionist of the wikipedia article
which updates itself still at the same
url
and that is what version control is and
that's what's depicted in this right
most um illustration here you have one
file
but you have the ability to go back and
forth in time
towards revision history and check out
what has happened and pick
a thing or a version that you want to
have and that's a very very useful thing
because it allows you to never lose
work that you have done mistakes are not
forever
and it helps you to organize everything
in a clean desk
so keep things organized keep track of
changes
revert changes all go back to previous
states
and now um leonard has prepared a short
crash course
in git so that you can see a couple of
the most
common commands i a git init um
initializes an empty git repository if
you
go into this repository then um
you can do changes uh two files or add
files like in this case
echoing a string hello world into readme
with unix redirection
this does nothing but creating a
readmemd file that contains the contents
hello world
and you can then
add this readme to the version control
system git
where i have a git add command and
commit it that is
save it ah thank god leonard you're back
i've been playing powerpoint karaoke
one second i'll promote you to moderator
again
can you hear me yes
[Music]
um
okay uh i think you should be able to
screen share
yeah i uh
i was badly explaining it so you can
take over
i don't believe that um
you were at this point right yep
okay um yeah sorry for
being away for so long um
of course on the day of the workshop the
uh
cancer of some connection issues i'm
actually on my
phone now like hot spot so i hope it
doesn't break and
uh buy fix soon um
okay so do you want to do the rest or
should i just take over ardina
uh you can take over uh i think you have
a better one
so i assume as as adina already showed
you the purpose of this slide was just
to
um present give a very kind of crash
course type of introduction
um into git and the con to see kind of
the concept of
um version control and code so um
through the terminal you created a
readme file
um that just has the sentence had a word
in it
and if you type ls you can show the
contents
of your directory which is the readme
file that you just created
and then you can use
a com a very um basic git command called
git add
and and specify the readme so this
tell basically tells git to track the
changes
in this readme file and then
you use another command called git
commit
with dash m for message and then in
double quotation marks a commit message
which
is just should just be a helpful
description of what the change you are
now
saving to the history of changes
um actually entails um so in this case
one could use initial commit which is
often used for the very first commit
in a repository um but in this case one
could argue that
this is actually not helpful and maybe
you should rather write something like
add hello world to read me or something
along that line that's pretty much up to
you
um and there are um huge debates on
what um is a good commission message and
what it's not
um so basically with this commit you
um commit the changes you just made to
this readme file
to the history of the repository and it
will become more clear what this means
once we start changing um the file
so actually i'm going to use the same um
operation
um to add another sentence to the um
readme file which would just be added
um below the hello world
um statement um and in this case i just
uh chose to write goodbye word and um
add this to the readme file so we
changed the file
and now we will run the same um
two operations again so again we add the
changes
so now this will just include um
the the new changes that happened to
this file since our last change
and and this is just this edition of
this new sentence goodbye world
and we will again
write a hopefully helpful commit message
um and in this case um it's actually
maybe
arguably not a very good commit message
it just says update read me
but it's not clear from the commit
message what this uh
uh change actually entails um but
nonetheless
we with this way we commit this change
to the readme file
also to the git history and um what we
can then do
when i talk about history what do i
actually mean so when we do
um use the command git log and
the additional argument to just um show
changes on one line
we can show the the commit history um
of this git repository and on the left
you will see
what are called hashes which you which
allow to uniquely identify
a specific change in your repository
and next to it you will see um
the commit message um that i use to
commit these changes to history
so this good lock command shows you the
history of changes
and actually by um you then there are
other commands
which would allow you to look at each
individual changes that happen at each
of these commits
um so with this you already have a very
basic history of the changes that
happened
and what is possible then with git are
these aspects of
going back and forth in history um so
that you could actually go back
and revert um your changes you did
before
and go back to a previous state of your
repository um
and finally a very common um
command that you will use with git is to
get status command
that will show you kind of the state of
your of your repository
and if if it has detected any changes in
files
or if any new files have been added to
your um
repository in this case it tells us that
um there's nothing to commit and the
working tree is clean so that they're
that it has not detected any new changes
in this repository
and um it's on branch master we won't go
into details of branching
um at this point but at a later point um
maybe just briefly about the concept so
um
the this history of changes usually
happens on one
central if you think about it as a
timeline so to say you could also think
about it as a tree or branch
so if you're basically on the main
branch or
timeline of your repository that is
commonly called in git language
um the master branch although more
recently
people have opted to change the name
scheme into
main branch and what git also allows you
is to work on separate versions so you
could open up
different branches that exist next to
the master branch
where you can independently change the
contents of the repo
eventually merge them back together and
there's all the flexibility
of how you can change and kind of go
through time
with the changes in your directory but
this just meant as a really kind of
crash course
in code um about what what's
what's up with git um okay
so maybe the quiz question what is
inside redmi now
if you kind of follow these instructions
and maybe
many of you can tell um if i do
um if i open up the file from the
terminal
using the vim program
then it can show me the file contents
which are in this case just these two
lines that i added
hello world and goodbye um world and
this is the current state of this file
and um just to maybe make clear um
we have this weird terminal and command
line and
might all seem a bit weird to you but in
the end what it just
is um is it's just a file on your
computer so if you go to your file
browser
and you go to the my project folder you
will see this file
readme.md and it will as you can see
here in the preview
it will have these two lines um in it
and maybe then just to clarify what
github or gitlab r which are other terms
you might heard before
um very briefly github and gitlab are
really just
um platforms where you can host the
contents of your git repository
so you can basically there's another set
of git commands with which you can
interact with this online platform and
you can send your code to for example
github and gitlab
and through in this way make it
available um to others to your
collaborators
or just kind of for yourself as a sort
of
backup of your code and here you can see
an illustration that maybe seems
confusing to you
at the moment maybe you already know all
these concepts
um all that i want to illustrate here is
basically
that you have some local changes on your
computer at the bottom right
and you can basically um like you can
see in the middle
push these changes to some so-called
remote repository
um for example github then other people
can um
clone your work um or update your work
apply changes to your work and
then just get this this whole um this
becomes this whole beautiful
um sometimes very big and confusing
workflow but which a lot of people use
to um yeah do serious um
code and software development and so
in this workshop we will present
workflows
that also share data and code
via these platforms and in later stages
of the workshop it will become clear
how you use these platforms like for
example github and gitlab